In this video I like to tell you
about the idea of Vectorization.
So, whether you using Octave or
a similar language like MATLAB or
whether you're using Python [INAUDIBLE],
R, Java, C++,
all of these languages have either
built into them or have regularly and
easily accessible difference in
numerical linear algebra libraries.
They're usually very well written,
highly optimized,
often sort of developed by people that
have PhDs in numerical computing or
they're really specialized
in numerical computing.
And when you're implementing machine
learning algorithms, if you're
able to take advantage of these linear
algebra libraries or these numerical
linear algebra libraries, and make some
routine calls to them rather than sort of
write code yourself to do things
that these libraries could be doing.
If you do that, then often you get code
that, first, is more efficient, so
you just run more quickly and
take better advantage of any parallel
hardware your computer may have and so on.
And second, it also means that you end up
with less code that you need to write,
so it's a simpler implementation that is
therefore maybe also more likely to be
by free.
And as a concrete example,
rather than writing code yourself to
multiply matrices, if you let
Octave do it by typing a times b,
that would use a very efficient
routine to multiply the two matrices.
And there's a bunch of examples like
these, where if you use appropriate
vectorization implementations you get much
simpler code and much more efficient code.
Let's look at some examples.
Here's our usual hypothesis for
linear regression, and
if you want to compute h(x),
notice that there's a sum on the right.
And so one thing you could do is, compute
the sum from j = 0 to j = n yourself.
Another way to think of this is to
think of h(x) as theta transpose x,
and what you can do is, think of this
as you are computing this inner product
between two vectors where theta is your
vector, say, theta 0, theta 1, theta 2.
If you have two features,
if n equals two, and
if you think x as this vector,
x0, x1, x2, and
these two views can give you
two different implementations.
Here's what I mean.
Here's an unvectorized implementation for
how to compute and by unvectorize,
I mean without vectorization.
We might first initialize
prediction just to be 0.0.
The prediction's going to eventually be
h(x), and then I'm going to have a for
loop for j=1 through n+1, prediction
gets incremented by theta(j) * x(j).
So it's kind of this expression over here.
By the way, I should mention,
in these vectors that I wrote over here,
I had these vectors being 0 index.
So I had theta 0, theta 1, theta 2.
But because MATLAB is one index,
theta 0 in that MATLAB, we would end up
representing as theta 1 and
the second element ends up as theta 2 and
this third element may end up as theta 3,
just because our vectors in
MATLAB are indexed starting from 1,
even though I wrote theta and
x here, starting indexing from 0,
which is why here I have a for loop.
j goes from 1 through n+1 rather than
j goes through 0 up to n, right?
But so this is an unvectorized
implementation in that we have for
loop that is summing up
the n elements of the sum.
In contrast, here's how you would
write a vectorized implementation,
which is that you would think of a x and
theta as vectors.
You just said prediction = theta' * x.
You're just computing like so.
So instead of writing all these
lines of code with a for loop,
you instead just have one line of code.
And what this line of code
on the right will do is,
it will use Octaves highly optimized
numerical linear algebra routines to
compute this inner product between the two
vectors, theta and X, and not only is
the vectorized implementation simpler,
it will also run much more efficiently.
So that was octave, but
the issue of vectorization applies to
other programming language as well.
Lets look on the example in C++.
Here's what an unvectorized
implementation might look like.
We again initialize prediction to 0.0 and
then we now how a for
loop for j = 0 up to n.
Prediction += theta j * x[j],
where again, you have this explicit for
loop that you write yourself.
In contrast, using a good numerical
linear algebra library in C++,
you could write a function like,
or rather.
In contrast, using a good numerical
linear algebra library in C++,
you can instead write code
that might look like this.
So depending on the details of your
numerical linear algebra library,
you might be able to have an object, this
is a C++ object, which is vector theta,
and a C++ object which is vector x,
and you just take theta.transpose * x,
where this times becomes a C++
sort of overload operator so
you can just multiply
these two vectors in C++.
And depending on the details of your
numerical linear algebra library,
you might end up using
a slightly different syntax, but
by relying on the library
to do this inner product,
you can get a much simpler piece of
code and a much more efficient one.
Let's now look at a more
sophisticated example.
Just to remind you,
here's our update rule for
a gradient descent of a linear regression.
And so we update theta j using this rule
for all values of j = 0, 1, 2, and so on.
And if I just write out these
equations for theta 0, theta 1,
theta 2, assuming we have two features,
so n = 2.
Then these are the updates we perform for
theta 0, theta 1, theta 2, where you might
remember my saying in an earlier video,
that these should be simultaneous updates.
So, let's see if we can come up with
a vectorizing notation of this.
Here are my same three equations
written in a slightly smaller font, and
you can imagine that one way to implement
these three lines of code is to have a for
loop that says for j = 0, 1 through 2 to
update theta j, or something like that.
But instead, let's come up with
a vectorized implementation and see if
we can have a simpler way to basically
compress these three lines of code or
a for loop that effectively does
these three steps one set at a time.
Let's see if we can take
these three steps and
compress them into one
line of vectorized code.
Here's the idea.
What I'm going to do is,
I'm going to think of theta as a vector,
and I'm gonna update theta as theta-
alpha times some other vector delta,
where delta's is going
to be equal to 1 over m,
sum from i = 1 through m.
And then this term over on the right,
okay?
So, let me explain what's going on here.
Here, I'm going to treat
theta as a vector, so
this is n plus one dimensional vector, and
I'm saying that theta gets here
updated as that's a vector, Rn + 1.
Alpha is a real number, and
delta, here is a vector.
So, this subtraction operation,
that's a vector subtraction, okay?
Cuz alpha times delta is a vector, and so
I'm saying theta gets this vector,
alpha times delta subtracted from it.
So, what is a vector delta?
Well this vector delta,
looks like this, and
what it's meant to be is really
meant to be this thing over here.
Concretely, delta will be a n
plus one dimensional vector, and
the very first element of the vector
delta is going to be equal to that.
So, if we have the delta,
if we index it from 0,
if it's delta 0, delta 1,
delta 2, what I want is
that delta 0 is equal to this
first box in green up above.
And indeed,
you might be able to convince yourself
that delta 0 is this 1
of the m sum of ho(x),
x(i) minus y(i) times x(i) 0.
So, let's just make sure
we're on this same page
about how delta really is computed.
Delta is 1 over m times this sum
over here, and what is this sum?
Well, this term over here,
that's a real number,
and the second term over here, x i,
this term over there is a vector, right,
because x(i) may be
a vector that would be,
say, x(i)0, x(i)1, x(i)2,
right, and what is the summation?
Well, what the summation
is saying is that,
this term, that is this term over here,
this is equal to, (h of(x(1))-
y(1)) * x(1) + (h of(x(2))-
y(2) x x(2) +, and so on, okay?
Because this is summation of i, so
as i ranges from i = 1 through m,
you get these different terms, and
you're summing up these terms here.
And the meaning of these terms, this
is a lot like if you remember actually
from the earlier quiz in this,
right, you saw this equation.
We said that in order to vectorize this
code we will instead said u = 2v + 5w.
So we're saying that the vector u
is equal to two times the vector v
plus five times the vector w.
So this is an example of how
to add different vectors and
this summation's the same thing.
This is saying that the summation over
here is just some real number, right?
That's kinda like the number two or
some other number times the vector, x1.
So it's kinda like 2v or
say some other number times x1, and
then plus instead of 5w we instead
have some other real number,
plus some other vector, and
then you add on other vectors, plus dot,
dot, dot, plus the other vectors,
which is why, over all,
this thing over here, that whole quantity,
that delta is just some vector.
And concretely, the three elements
of delta correspond if n = 2,
the three elements of delta
correspond exactly to this thing,
to the second thing, and this third thing.
Which is why when you update theta
according to theta- alpha delta,
we end up carrying exactly
the same simultaneous updates
as the update rules that we have up top.
So, I know that there was a lot that
happened on this slide, but again,
feel free to pause the video and
if you aren't sure
what just happened I'd encourage you
to step through this slide to make
sure you understand why is it that this
update here with this definition of delta,
right, why is it that that's
equal to this update on top?
And if it's still not clear,
one insight is that, this thing over here,
that's exactly the vector x, and so
we're just taking all three of these
computations, and compressing them into
one step with this vector delta,
which is why we can come up
with a vectorized implementation of this
step of the new refresh in this way.
So, I hope this step makes sense and
do look at the video and
see if you can understand it.
In case you don't understand quite
the equivalence of this map,
if you implement this, this turns
out to be the right answer anyway.
So, even if you didn't quite
understand equivalence,
if you just implement it this way, you'll
be able to get linear regression to work.
But if you're able to figure out
why these two steps are equivalent,
then hopefully that will give you a better
understanding of vectorization as well.
And finally, if you are implementing
linear regression using more than one or
two features, so sometimes we use
linear regression with 10's or 100's or
1,000's of features.
But if you use the vectorized
implementation of linear regression,
you'll see that will run much faster
than if you had, say, your old for
loop that was updating theta zero,
then theta one, then theta two yourself.
So, using a vectorized implementation,
you should be
able to get a much more efficient
implementation of linear regression.
And when you vectorize later algorithms
that we'll see in this class,
there's good trick, whether in Octave or
some other language like C++, Java,
for getting your code to
run more efficiently.